Documentation for python requires (#1179)
conan-io/docs: extending/python_requires.rst

.. _python_requires:

Python requires: reusing code [EXPERIMENTAL]
============================================

.. warning::

    This is an **experimental** feature subject to breaking changes in future releases.

The ``python_requires()`` feature is a very convenient way to share files and code between

> different recipes. A *Python Requires* is just like any another recipe, it is the way it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different recipes. A *Python Requires* is just like any other recipe, it is the way it is
```

required from the consumer what makes the difference.

The *Python Requires* recipe file, besides exporting its own required sources, can export
files to be used by the consumer recipes and also python code in the recipe file itself.

Let's have a look at an example showing all its capabilities (you can find all
the sources in ....):

 - Python requires recipe:

    .. code-block:: python

        import os
        import shutil
        from conans import ConanFile, CMake, tools
        from scm_utils import get_version

        class PythonRequires(ConanFile):
            name = "pyreq"
            version = "version"

            exports = "scm_utils.py"
            exports_sources = "CMakeLists.txt"

>         def get_conanfile():

Reviewer: I would like to have this confirmed as the canonical/recommended way of using python requires

Author: Yes, this is something we have to agree, @conan-io/barbarians

            class BaseConanFile(ConanFile):

                settings = "os", "compiler", "build_type", "arch"
                options = {"shared": [True, False]}

>                 default_options = "shared=False"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                default_options = {"shared": False}
```

      Subsequent requirements of that conan recipe will reuse the previously imported module. Global initialization at
      parsing time and global state are discouraged.
    - They are transitive. One recipe using ``python_requires()`` can be also consumed with a ``python_requires()`` from
      another package recipe.
    - They are not automatically updated with the ``--update`` argument from remotes.
    - Different packages can require different versions in their ``python_requires()``. They are private to each recipe,
      so they do not conflict with each other, but it is the responsibility of the user to keep consistency.
    - They are not overridden from downstream consumers. Again, as they are private, they are not affected by other packages,
      even consumers

Reuse python sources
--------------------

In the example proposed we are using two functions through the ``base``
variable: ``base.get_conanfile()`` and ``base.get_version()``. The first one is defined
directly in the *conanfile.py* file, but the second one is in a different source file that

> we have exported together with the ``pyreq/version@user/channel`` recipe using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was exported together with the ``pyreq/version@user/channel`` recipe using the
```

``exports`` attribute.

This works without any Conan magic, it is just plain Python and you can even return a
class from a function and inherit from it. That's just what we are proposing in this
example: all the business logic in contained in the *Python Requires* so every recipe
will reuse it automatically. The consumer only needs to define the ``name`` and ``version``:

.. code-block:: python

    from conans import ConanFile, python_requires

    base = python_requires("pyreq/version@user/channel")

    class ConsumerConan(base.get_conanfile()):
        name = "consumer"
        version = "version"

        # Everything else is inherited

while all the functional code is defined in the *python requires* recipe file:

.. code-block:: python

    from conans import ConanFile, python_requires

    [...]

    def get_conanfile():

        class BaseConanFile(ConanFile):
            def source(self):
                [...]

            def build(self):
                [...]

Reuse source files
------------------

> Up to now, we have been reusing python code, but we can also package files within the

Reviewer: Really? You are kind of reusing the *scm_utils.py* in the previous example...

Author: :unamused: ...for a C++ developer, python code are not **sources** 🤣 

I understand your concern, maybe it is the difference between `exports` and `exports_sources`, up to here I've been reusing code from the `exports` family, now I'm targeting the `exports_sources` files. If you can suggest names for those sections...

Reviewer: ok, np
